- The joys of managing dependencies and modern day systems
sends a chill over most developers
at some point in their career.
Now, for me, this is especially true in the Java world
with the promises of J2EE,
where an application server provides all the dependencies
you need to run your application.
Issues that arise with provided dependencies
can quickly spiral out of control.
Vendor lock-in will occur,
regardless of promises that it won't.
Operating systems will have updates
to core components that you rely on
and, inevitably, those changes will be non-passive
and they will render your application broken
without you changing a single line of code.
The same non-passive changes will occur in components
that you specifically load into the environment
for all applications to use.
Because, at some point,
one of those applications
is going to require an updated version
that breaks everything else.
Now, this cycle goes on and on.
With twelve-factor applications,
you avoid this scenario
by providing all of the dependencies
that your application needs to run.
The dependencies are declared in a manifest
appropriate to the development language.
This manifest not only specifies the dependency,
but the appropriate version to leverage.
Your build system will then package that dependency
for the application to use during deployment and runtime.
The specification of dependencies
is not only critical to the twelve-factor model,
but also the isolation of those dependencies.
Under no circumstance should multiple applications
share a common dependency.
Each application should run in its own sandbox
and execute as if there is nothing provided
by the underlying operating system.
Now, as mentioned previously,
this is a shift from traditional models
and I find that it is very difficult aspect
when migrating legacy code from any developers.
All too often in the past we expected the application
to consume resources of the runtime environment.
Consider how many batch jobs you've written
that leverage Sendmail or cURL.
Consider how many times you've logged messages
to an underlying console or log system
without ever explicitly declaring them in your application.
This is a major shift in the development paradigm,
but the rewards are justified.
One of the major rewards
is true portability of your application,
which is very important in a distributed model.
The application that doesn't rely
on anything from its runtime container
can literally run anywhere that supports its execution.
Since most modern operating systems and containers
have the ability to run most modern frameworks,
that becomes a minor concern, if any at all.
Other major benefit of this factor
is easier onboarding for a new developer.
A developer will not have to go through
any complex setup to get the application running locally.
Since the application deployed locally
will behave the same as if it's deployed remotely,
there is little effort for him or her to get started.
This means a lot to Agile teams
where resources may be shuffled,
often based on business needs.
Now, as long as you build your application correctly
using this factor,
your app should run anywhere, in any container,
and on any operating system.